Environmental, social, and governance


# Environmental, social, and governance



| Part of a series on |
| --- |
| Governance |
| Models * Algorithmic * Bad * Collaborative * Electronic * Good * Multistakeholder * Open-source * Private |
| By level * Local * Global |
| By field * Climate * Clinical * Corporate * Cultural * Data * Ecclesiastical * Environmental * Higher education * Information * Network * Ocean * Political party * Security sector * Self * Simulation * Soil * Technology * Transnational |
| Measures * World Governance Index * Sustainable Governance Indicators * Bertelsmann Transformation Index * Policy uncertainty |
| Related topics * Chief governance officer * Governance, risk managementand compliance * Environmental, social, andcorporate governance * Market governance mechanism |
| * v * t * e |

**Environmental, social, and governance** (**ESG**) is shorthand for an investing principle that prioritizes environmental issues, social issues, and corporate governance. Investing with ESG considerations is sometimes referred to as responsible investing or, in more proactive cases, *impact investing*.

The term ESG first came to prominence in a 2004 report titled "Who Cares Wins", which was a joint initiative of financial institutions at the invitation of the United Nations (UN). By 2023, the ESG movement had grown from a UN corporate social responsibility initiative into a global phenomenon representing more than US$30 trillion in assets under management.

Criticisms of ESG vary depending on viewpoint and area of focus. These areas include data quality and a lack of standardization; evolving regulation and politics; greenwashing; and variety in the definition and assessment of social good. Some critics argue that ESG serves as a de facto extension of governmental regulation, with large investment firms like BlackRock imposing ESG standards that governments cannot or do not directly legislate. This has led to accusations that ESG creates a mechanism for influencing markets and corporate behavior without democratic oversight, raising concerns about accountability and overreach.


## History

Investment decisions are predominantly based on the potential for financial returns for a given level of risk. However, there have always been many other criteria for deciding where to place money—from political considerations to heavenly reward.

In the 1970s, the worldwide abhorrence of the apartheid regime in South Africa led to one of the most renowned examples of selective disinvestment along ethical lines. As a response to a growing call for sanctions against the regime, the Reverend Leon Sullivan, a board member of General Motors in the United States, drew up a Code of Conduct in 1977 for practising business with South Africa. What became known as the Sullivan Principles (Sullivan Code) attracted a great deal of attention. Several reports were commissioned by the government to examine how many US companies were investing in South African businesses that were contravening the Sullivan Code. The conclusions of the reports led to mass disinvestment by the US from many South African companies. The resulting pressure applied to the South African regime by its business community added great weight to the growing impetus for the system of apartheid to be abandoned.

In the 1960s and 1970s, the economist Milton Friedman, in response to the prevailing mood of philanthropy, argued that social responsibility adversely affects a firm's financial performance and that regulation and interference from "big government" will always damage the macro economy. His contention that the valuation of a company or asset should be predicated almost exclusively on the financial bottom line (with the costs incurred by social responsibility being deemed non-essential) was prevalent for most of the 20th century (see Friedman doctrine). Towards the end of the 20th century, however, a contrary theory began to gain ground. In 1988 James S. Coleman wrote an article in the *American Journal of Sociology* titled "Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital", the article challenged the dominance of the concept of 'self-interest' in economics and introduced the concept of social capital into the measurement of value.

There was a new form of pressure applied, acting in a coalition with environmental groups: using the leveraging power of collective investors to encourage companies and capital markets to incorporate environmental and social risks and opportunities into their decision-making.

Although the concept of selective investment was not a new one, with the demand side of the investment market having a long history of those wishing to control the effects of their investments, what began to develop at the turn of the 21st century was a response from the supply-side of the equation. At the time, this field was typically referred to as ethical or socially responsible investment. The investment market began to pick up on the growing need for products geared towards what was becoming known as the Responsible Investor. In 1981, Freer Spreckley, the creator of Social Enterprise, published SOCIAL AUDIT — A Management Tool for Co-operative Working, in which he first introduced the idea of a set of internal criteria that social enterprises and other organisations should use in their annual planning and accounting. These were financial viability, social wealth creation, organisational governance, and environmental responsibility, and they became known as social accounting and auditing. Later on, in 1998, John Elkington, co-founder of the business consultancy Sustainability, published *Cannibals with Forks: the Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century Business*, in which he identified the newly emerging cluster of non-financial considerations that should be included in the factors determining a company or equity's value. He coined the phrase the "triple bottom line", referring to the financial, environmental, and social factors included in the new calculation. At the same time, the strict division between the environmental sector and the financial sector began to break down. In the City of London in 2002, Chris Yates-Smith, a member of the international panel chosen to oversee the technical construction, accreditation, and distribution of the Organic Production Standard and founder of a branding consultancy, established one of the first environmental finance research groups. The informal group of financial leaders, city lawyers, and environmental stewardship NGOs became known as *The Virtuous Circle*, and its brief was to examine the nature of the correlation between environmental and social standards and financial performance. Several of the world's big banks and investment houses began to respond to the growing interest in the ESG investment market with the provision of sell-side services; among the first were the Brazilian bank Unibanco, and Mike Tyrell's Jupiter Fund in London, which used ESG based research to provide both HSBC and Citicorp with selective investment services in 2001.

In the early years of the new millennium, the major part of the investment market still accepted the historical assumption that ethically directed investments were by their nature likely to hinder financial returns. Philanthropy was not considered to aid profitable business, and Friedman had provided a widely accepted academic basis for the argument that the costs of behaving in an ethically responsible manner would outweigh the benefits. However, the assumptions were beginning to be fundamentally challenged. In 1998 two journalists, Robert Levering and Milton, brought out the "Fortune 100 Best Companies to Work For", initially a listing in the magazine *Fortune*, then a book compiling a list of the best-practicing companies in the United States with regard to corporate social responsibility and how their financial performance fared as a result. Of the three areas of concern that ESG represented, the environmental and social had received most of the public and media attention, not least because of the growing fears concerning climate change. Moskowitz brought the spotlight onto the corporate governance aspect of responsible investment. His analysis concerned how the companies were managed, what the stockholder relationships were, and how the employees were treated. He argued that improving corporate governance procedures did not damage financial performance; on the contrary, it maximized productivity, ensured corporate efficiency, and led to the sourcing and utilizing of superior management talents. In the early 2000s, the success of Moskowitz's list and its effect on companies' ease of recruitment and brand reputation began to challenge the historical assumptions regarding the financial effect of ESG factors. In 2011, Alex Edmans, a finance professor at Wharton, published a paper in the *Journal of Financial Economics* showing that the "100 Best Companies to Work For" outperformed their peers in terms of stock returns by 2–3% a year over 1984–2009, and delivered earnings that systematically exceeded analyst expectations.

In 2005, the United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative commissioned a report from the international law firm Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer on the interpretation of the law with respect to investors and ESG issues. The Freshfields report concluded that not only was it permissible for investment companies to integrate ESG issues into investment analysis, but it was also arguably part of their fiduciary duty to do so. In 2014, the Law Commission (England and Wales) confirmed that there was no bar on pension trustees and others from taking account of ESG factors when making investment decisions.

Where Friedman had provided academic support for the argument that the integration of ESG type factors into financial practice would reduce financial performance, numerous reports began to appear in the early years of the century that provided research that supported arguments to the contrary. In 2006 Oxford University's Michael Barnett and New York University's Robert Salomon published an influential study which concluded that the two sides of the argument might even be complementary—they propounded a relationship between social responsibility and financial performance. Both selective investment practices and non-selective ones could maximise the financial performance of an investment portfolio, and the only route likely to damage performance was a middle way of selective investment. Besides the large investment companies and banks taking an interest in matters ESG, an array of investment companies specifically dealing with responsible investment and ESG based portfolios began to spring up throughout the financial world.

Many in the investment industry believe the development of ESG factors as considerations in investment analysis to be inevitable. The evidence toward a relationship between consideration for ESG issues and financial performance is becoming greater and the combination of fiduciary duty and a wide recognition of the necessity of the sustainability of investments in the long term has meant that environmental social and corporate governance concerns are now becoming increasingly important in the investment market. In addition, surveys of ultimate beneficiaries (on whose behalf savings and pensions are made) typically show high levels of support for considering social and environmental issues alongside long-run, risk-adjusted returns. ESG has become less a question of philanthropy than practicality.

There has been uncertainty and debate as to what to call the inclusion of intangible factors relating to the sustainability and ethical effectiveness of investments. Names have ranged from the early use of buzz words such as "green" and "eco", to the wide array of possible descriptions for the types of investment analysis—"responsible investment", "socially responsible investment" (SRI), "ethical", "extra-financial", "long horizon investment" (LHI), "enhanced business", "corporate health", "non-traditional", and others. But the predominance of the term ESG has now become fairly widely accepted. A survey of 350 global investment professionals conducted by Axa Investment Managers and AQ Research in 2008 concluded the vast majority of professionals preferred the term ESG to describe such data.

In January 2016, the PRI, UNEP FI and The Generation Foundation launched a three-year project to end the debate on whether fiduciary duty is a legitimate barrier to the integration of environmental, social, and governance issues in investment practice and decision-making.

This follows the publication in September 2015 of *Fiduciary Duty in the 21st Century* by the PRI, UNEP FI, UNEP Inquiry and UN Global Compact. The report concluded that "Failing to consider all long-term investment value drivers, including ESG issues, is a failure of fiduciary duty". It also acknowledged that despite significant progress, many investors have yet to fully integrate ESG issues into their investment decision-making processes. In 2021, several organizations were working to make ESG compliance a better understood process in order to establish standards between rating agencies, amongst industries, and across jurisdictions. This included companies like Workiva working from a technology tool standpoint; agencies like the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) developing common themes in certain industries; and governmental regulations like the EU's Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR).

During the COVID-19 Pandemic, BlackRock, Fidelity, and Amundi among other asset management companies, placed pressure on pharmaceutical companies in which they had a large stake to cooperate with each other.

In 2023, Leonard Leo and associated networks launched a campaign to dismantle ESG, with special targeting on climate-friendly investment. Consumers' Research and Republican attorneys general announced investigations into The Vanguard Group. Vanguard distanced itself from ESG investing as its CEO states that it's not compatible with its fiduciary duties to the investors. Fewer than 1 in 7 of their active equity managers outperformed the broad market in any five-year period and none of them relied exclusively on a net-zero investment methodology.


## Investments with ESG criteria

Responsible investing through ESG has been globally driven by the COP21 or the Paris agreement, and the UN 2030 sustainable development goals.

ESG factors and ratings took an established place in the finance realm. Indeed, the 2021 ESG assets market value was over $18.4 trillion worth of investments with a projected growth of 12.9% until 2026. ESG saw outflows for the first time in 2023.

The EU has a leading position in the sustainable funds market with 84% of global assets in this sector. Additionally, it stands as the most advanced and diversified market for ESG investments. In comparison, the US, following at a distance, accounted for 11% of these global sustainable fund assets by September 2023.

Global Sustainable Fund Statistics by region in 2023 Q3
| Region | Flows | Assets | | Funds | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| USD billions | USD billions | % of total | Nos. | % of total |
| Europe | 15.3 | 2,293 | 84 | 5,608 | 73 |
| United States | −2.7 | 299 | 11 | 661 | 9 |
| Asia ex-Japan | 2.0 | 67 | 2 | 539 | 7 |
| Australia/New Zealand | 0.0 | 31 | 1 | 268 | 4 |
| Japan | −0.9 | 23 | 1 | 236 | 3 |
| Canada | −0.1 | 31 | 1 | 336 | 4 |
| Total | 13.7 | 2,744 | 100 | 7,648 | 100 |

It is to be noted that amid allegations of greenwashing and stricter regulations, there is a notable decrease in funds incorporating ESG-related terms into their names. An increasing number of funds in the United States are removing ESG-related terms from their names, a trend not observed in Europe.

The University of Cambridge defines sustainable investments as it involves constructing a portfolio by selecting assets deemed to be sustainable or capable of enduring over the long term. It can also be seen as a resolute approach that excludes assets perceived as detrimental to long-term environmental and social sustainability.

ESG standards have been developed in response to the growing worldwide demand for more sustainable and socially responsible investments. Since the development in 1960 of these standards has evolved gradually and is the result of a global recognition of the importance of sustainability and social responsibility, it is difficult to determine precisely which countries needed these standards first. However, certain countries or regions are particularly active in promoting ESG standards. For example, European countries such as the Scandinavian countries (Denmark, Sweden, Norway) and countries like the Netherlands are pioneers in integrating ESG criteria into investment and corporate governance policies. Similarly, these Nordic countries tend today to score relatively well in many international assessments of ESG criteria.

Moreover, between 2007 and 2016, the number of traditional funds putting ESG criteria into perspective rose from 260 to over 1,000. Moreover, the number of investments incorporating ESG criteria is estimated to have doubled between 2019 and 2022. Another study also claims that funds with an ESG commitment doubled over these three years, from 3% to 5%. Finally, one last study shows that there is real growth in global sustainable investment assets between 2012 and 2020, with asset value growth from 13.6 trillion USD to 35.3 trillion USD. This growth in ESG-compliant funds is, of course, in line with investors' growing interest in sustainable investment. However, lower returns for ESG funds over the last two years has led to a large decrease in investments.


### Stakeholders

As far as stakeholders are concerned, it's important to note that not all generations and countries are affected in the same way. Firstly, on a global scale, there are notable differences between regions in terms of companies' willingness and ability to address ESG issues in their investments. The results of various surveys seem to confirm these disparities, showing a more favorable trend in Europe, the Middle East, Africa (EMEA), and, Asia-Pacific, in contrast to North America. Indeed, a high proportion of respondents in Asia-Pacific (78%) and EMEA (74%) consider ESG issues, while a smaller majority in North America (59%) attach importance to them. This year's ESG ranking podium is exclusively European "Nordic countries", with Finland in first place, followed by Sweden in second and Iceland in third. These regional disparities may change over time, although the underlying reasons for these differences are not fully understood. For example, in countries benefiting from developed markets and strict regulations, investors may assume that certain ESG issues are addressed by regulations, thus explaining a lower sensitivity to these topics.

However, comparing ESG ratings from one geographical area to another is not an easy task, especially in a global market. Variations in company ratings, particularly between Europe (in the best position) and North America (in the worst), may reflect the quality of reporting rather than the intrinsic quality of ESG practices. Disclosure requirements vary considerably between regions, and some binding regulations in Europe, such as the publication of a "non-financial statement" for companies with more than 500 employees, may positively influence the region's ESG ratings. At the same time, European investors' greater interest in ESG investments is also contributing to this trend.

New generations, such as Millennials and Generation Z, are showing a growing interest in ESG investing, aligning their values with their investment choices by favoring companies that have sustainable practices, respect human rights, promote diversity and are committed to positive actions for society. In fact, according to a survey conducted in 2021, around a third of Millennials often or only use investments that take ESG criteria into account, compared with 19% of Generation Z, 16% of Generation X and 2% of baby boomers.

However, it is important to challenge this generalized view of ESG investing. While some groups are showing increased interest, it's essential to recognize the diversity of perspectives and priorities across generations. This bias can lead to a simplified or even erroneous view of the real effect of ESG investments. Excessive focus on the most engaged generations may mask progress or shortcomings elsewhere, underlining the need for a more balanced and nuanced assessment of the effect of ESG investments.


### Firms

The implementation of ESG practices differs across sectors. The sectors of the industry, information technology, consumer discretionary, and materials are the sectors that have the biggest interest in the ESG practice (see figure 2). According to the sector, the weights attributed to the relative importance of environmental, social, and governance factors change. Over time, the weighting of categories is subject to change. For instance, according to Nagy et al. (2020), the governance factor recorded a significant growth in weight, rising from 19% in 2007 to 27% in 2019 and then to 31% in 2020. Overall, an MSCI study revealed that: the average weight of the environmental pillar was 30%, social factors was 39%, and governance elements were 31% across all the sectors.

Another bias that the ESG instrument can exhibit is that larger companies generally have higher ESG scores compared to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Sustainability reports have so far been self-declared and unaudited, resulting in companies often seeking to present themselves in the best possible light. Furthermore, several studies have demonstrated significant data omissions, inaccurate figures, and unfounded claims ᶜⁱᵗᵃᵗⁱᵒⁿ ⁿᵉᵉᵈᵉᵈ.

The gap between the performance of large corporations and SMEs can have various explanations. According to studies, companies that provide more robust information tend to receive higher ESG scores, even if they have historically weak ESG practices or correspond to a higher overall ESG risk. The best ratings for these companies may be linked to their enhanced ESG compliances or because they allocate more resources to the preparation of their non-financial reports. For instance, Bristol-Myers Squibb, a large pharmaceutical company, maintains a high ESG rating even after being involved in recent controversies. In contrast, Phibro Animal Health, a small pharmaceutical company, receives a lower score, despite its commitments and compliances with ESG criteria. SMEs may also find it challenging to implement the necessary measurement frameworks.


## Dimensions

ESG has been adopted throughout the United States financial industry to describe and measure the sustainability and societal influence of a company or business. MSCI, a global ESG rating agency, defines ESG investing as the consideration of environmental, social, and governance factors alongside financial factors in the investment decision-making process. Likewise, S&P highlights consideration of the ways in which environmental, social, and governance risks and opportunities can have material effects on companies' performance.

1. Environmental aspect: Data is reported on climate change, greenhouse gas emissions, biodiversity loss, deforestation/reforestation, pollution mitigation, energy efficiency and water management.
2. Social aspect: Data is reported on employee safety and health, working conditions, diversity, equity, and inclusion, and conflicts and humanitarian crises, and is relevant in risk and return assessments directly through results in enhancing (or destroying) customer satisfaction and employee engagement.
3. Governance aspect: Data is reported on corporate governance such as preventing bribery, corruption, Diversity of Board of Directors, executive compensation, cybersecurity and privacy practices, and management structure.

Issues driving Morningstar / Sustainalytics ESG Risk Ratings
| Category | Issue | Contribution to ESG Risk Rating |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Environmental 43.3% | Carbon - Own Operations | 19.2% |
| Resource Use | 10.3% |
| Emissions, Effluents and Waste | 7.1% |
| Environmental and Social Impact of Products and Services | 6.7% |
| Social 34.1% | Human Rights | 22.8% |
| Occupational Health and Safety | 7.5% |
| Community Relations | 3.8% |
| Governance 22.6% | Corporate Governance | 11.9% |
| Business Ethics | 6.7% |
| Human Capital | 4.0% |


### Environmental dimension

Both the threat of climate change and concern over climate change have grown, so investors are choosing to factor sustainability issues into their investment choices to enable better risk-adjusted returns. The issues often represent externalities, such as influences on the functioning and revenues of the company that are not exclusively affected by market mechanisms. As with all areas of ESG, the breadth of possible concerns is vast (e.g. greenhouse gas emissions, biodiversity, waste management, water management) but some of the chief areas are listed below:


#### Climate crisis

The body of research providing data of global trends in climate change has led some investors—pension funds, holders of insurance reserves—to begin to screen investments in terms of their effect on the perceived factors of climate change. Fossil fuel-reliant industries are less attractive. In the UK, investment policies were particularly affected by the conclusions of the *Stern Review* in 2006, a report commissioned by the British government to provide an economic analysis of the issues associated with climate change. Its conclusions pointed towards the necessity of including considerations of climate change and environmental issues in all financial calculations and that the benefits of early action on climate change would outweigh its costs. The main framework used globally is the Taskforce on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD).


#### Environmental sustainability

In every area of the debate from the depletion of resources to the future of industries dependent upon diminishing raw materials the question of the obsolescence of a company's product or service is becoming central to the value ascribed to that company. The long-term view is becoming prevalent amongst investors.


### Social dimension


#### Diversity

There is a growing belief that the broader the pool of talent open to an employer the greater the chance of finding the optimum person for the job. Innovation and agility are seen as the great benefits of diversity, and there is an increasing awareness of what has come to be known as *the power of difference.* However, merely holding mandatory diversity training is not enough to open companies to opportunities for targeted groups. Studies find the more a company intentionally integrates work teams, the more open it becomes to a diverse workforce; the US military is a prime example of races and genders working well together.


#### Human rights

In 2006, the US Courts of Appeals ᶜˡᵃʳⁱᶠⁱᶜᵃᵗⁱᵒⁿ ⁿᵉᵉᵈᵉᵈ ʷʰⁱᶜʰ? ruled that there was a case to answer bringing the area of a company's social responsibilities squarely into the financial arena. This area of concern is widening to include such considerations as the effect on local communities, the health and welfare of employees and a more thorough examination of a company's supply chain. One of the major frameworks used is the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.


#### Consumer protection

Until fairly recently, caveat emptor ("buyer beware") was the governing principle of commerce and trading. In recent times however, there has been an increased assumption that the consumer has a right to a degree of protection, and the vast growth in damages litigation has meant that consumer protection is a central consideration for those seeking to limit a company's risk and those examining a company's credentials with an eye to investing. The collapse of the US subprime mortgage market initiated a growing movement against predatory lending has also become an important area of concern.


#### Animal welfare

Animal welfare concerns involve testing products or ingredients on animals, breeding for testing, exhibiting animals, or factory farms.


#### Conservatives

Out of the 435 ESG shareholder proposals that were recorded by the non-profit organization As You Sow in 2021, 22 were classified as conservative by the organization. The National Center for Public Policy Research has asked 7 companies to prepare a report on the BRT Statement of the Purpose of a Corporation. Other conservative proposals include reports on charitable contributions and board nominee ideological diversity.


### Corporate governance dimension

Corporate governance refers to the structures and processes that direct and control companies. Good governance is seen to ensure companies are more accountable, resilient and transparent to investors and gives them the tools to respond to stakeholder concerns.

Corporate Governance in ESG includes issues from the Board of Director's view, Governance Lens watching over Corporate Behavior of the CEO, C-Suite, and employees at large includes measuring the Business ethics, anti-competitive practices, corruption, tax and providing accounting transparency for stakeholders.

MSCI puts in the Governance side of the bucket corporate behavior practices and governance of board diversity, executive pay, ownership, and control, and accounting that the board of directors have to oversee on behalf of stakeholders. Other concerns include reporting and transparency, business ethics, board oversight, CEO / board chair split, shareholder right to nominate board candidates, stock buybacks, and dark money given to influence elections.


#### Management structure

The system of internal procedures and controls that makes up the management structure of a company is in the valuation of that company's equity. Attention has been focused in recent years on the balance of power between the CEO and the board of directors and specifically the differences between the European model and the US model—in the US studies have found that 80% of companies have a CEO who is also the chairman of the board, in the UK and the European model it was found that 90% of the largest companies split the roles of CEO and chairman.


#### Employee relations

In the United States Moskowitz's list of the *Fortune 100 Best Companies to Work For* has become not only an important tool for employees but companies are beginning to compete keenly for a place on the list, as not only does it help to recruit the best workforce, it appears to have a noticeable effect on company values. Employee relations relate also to the representation of co-workers in the decision-making of companies, and the ability to participate in a union.


#### Executive compensation

Companies are now being asked to list the percentage levels of bonus payments and the levels of remuneration of the highest paid executives are coming under close scrutiny from stock holders and equity investors alike.


#### Employee compensation

Besides executive compensation, equitable pay of other employees is a consideration in the governance of an organization. This includes pay equity for employees of all genders. Pay equity audits and the results of those audits may be required by various regulations and, in some cases, made available to the public for review. Hermann J. Stern differentiates four methods to include ESG performance in employee compensation:

1. ESG Targets (Objectives for activities, projects and ESG results set by the company as a goal)
2. ESG Relative Performance Measurement (compared to peers, on the basis of key figures the company considers relevant)
3. ESG Ratings Agencies (Refinitiv, S&P Trucost and RobecoSam, Sustainalytics, ISS ESG, MSCI ESG, Vigeo Eiris, EcoVadis, Minerva Analytics, etc.)
4. ESG Performance Evaluations (internal or independent performance assessment by means of expert opinions, based on internally and externally available objective and subjective facts)

### Real-world ESG achievements

The growing integration of environmental, social, and governance criteria into investment decisions has spawned a series of myths and preconceptions surrounding their true effectiveness and relevance. These misperceptions, which are widespread in the financial world, have often obscured the reality of the effectiveness of sustainable value investing.

Investors motivated by financial value, as well as those guided by ethical values, are now factoring ESG considerations into their decisions. This shift is not just an evolution of values-based listed stock selection, but a profound transformation of the investment paradigm. However, this progress comes up against persistent misconceptions.

During the last ten years, ESG investments have increased significantly in both the US and Europe. However, quantifying true ESG effects is tricky for several reasons. Firstly, despite the attention devoted to ESG in the literature, there is a real gap between theory and reality. The real effects of changes in investment practices are complicated to quantify because some variables are qualitative rather than quantitative. Secondly, the rating agencies that attribute ESG scores do not use the same metrics, which leads to different results. Overall, companies with high ESG scores have higher profits than others.


#### Social Pillar

The social pillar deals with the assessment of both internal (workers) and external relationships (local community/consumers). This pillar focuses on human rights, privacy policies, working conditions, and initiatives that benefit underprivileged communities, among other things. Studies have shown that if the quality of the internal and external relationship is good, it generates a positive effect on the benefits of local sustainable development and worker well-being, as well as indirect financial benefits in addition to the financial performance of businesses. Particular contexts such as the COVID-19 pandemic have emphasized the pressure of the S-pillar. Indeed, in this particular context, the inequalities increase and most disadvantaged groups suffer more than the others.

However, there is a gap inside the regulatory framework because there is no common agreement on the assessment of the social pillar. Therefore, the rating agencies don’t use the same metrics which create a high divergence in the different evaluations. Moreover, the social pillar is difficult to measure because it relies on social aspects that are empirically limited and quantifiable, e.g. it refers to notions such as well-being, and discrimination which needs a deep understanding with a detailed analysis. To conclude, assessing the real effects of the social pillar is very tough.


#### Governance Pillar

The firm leadership, internal controls, audits, board diversity and composition, strategies, and policies are all included under the governance pillar. Regarding governance, it has been found that the financial performance of a business is influenced by its decision-making body. For instance, gender diversity improved CSR, decreased corporate social irresponsibility, and as a result, improved business performance. The size of a company's board and management experience were strongly correlated with its financial performance. CSR describes the sustainability tactics used by companies to make sure their operations are ethically acceptable. On the contrary, ESG are employed to evaluate the overall sustainability of an organisation. ESG are used as measures.

The Governance pillar offers considerable and high portfolio returns, according to early research using the ESG filter on value profitability and momentum indicators. In agreement with some findings, when the entire sample is taken under consideration, the environmental and governance indicators have a considerable negative effect on portfolio volatility and a favorable effect on portfolio return growth. According to the countries, some indicators are less important than others, and one of the last contributing ESG performance scores for the developing countries is governance.

The G scores (as well as the S score) are subjective measures and are more likely to be manipulated to elevate ESG performance. These two pillars (G and S) are also more subjected to greenwashing.


#### Environment Pillar

The Environmental (E) pillar of ESG assesses how an industry affects the environment by considering elements such as carbon footprint, pollution levels, resource management, dependence on fossil fuels, and efforts to address climate change. Addressing these issues is essential to the long-term financial stability of a company. Investors identify opportunities in eco-friendly activities, which can lead to competitive advantages in eco-friendly goods and services. Examples of these practices include the use of renewable energy, resource conservation, pollution reduction, and reduced carbon footprints. Despite the ESG’s attention, there is a significant research gap in the implementation of ESG practices to reduce carbon emissions in the industry.

A recent OECD evaluation on ESG assessed different E-score approaches. Both high and low correlations were found when comparing the E pillar score with the total ESG scores from various providers. This is because the rating agencies use different ESG measurements and primarily focus on environmental issues. The OECD’s study gives different surprising results. First, the research indicates that a higher score on the overall E pillar is not always associated with a low environmental effect by analyzing factors such as total CO2 and CO2 equivalent emissions, total waste created, total energy utilized, and total water usage. Unexpectedly, the general E pillar score and total CO2 emissions were found to be positively correlated. Secondly, two providers report that CO2 emissions are typically greater in companies with the highest ESG rankings. Similarly, different data providers assign higher E pillar scores to organizations that generate more hazardous and non-hazardous waste. Moreover, The influence of regulatory pressures in lowering businesses' pollution emissions is enhanced by environmental compensation. This implies enhanced environmental performance results from the combination of successful self-regulation achieved through governance mechanisms and regulatory pressure.

So having a high ESG score does not always seem to always have a positive and measurable effect on the environment, but leads to more financial incentives: a higher profit and larger market shares.


## Responsible investment

The three domains of environmental, social, and corporate governance are intimately linked to the concept of responsible investment (RI). RI began as a niche investment area, serving the needs of those who wished to invest but wanted to do so within ethically defined parameters. In recent years it has become a much larger proportion of the investment market. By June 2020, flows into U.S. sustainable funds reached $20.9 billion, nearly matching 2019's flows of $21.4 billion. By the end of 2020, flows into U.S. sustainable funds surpassed $51 billion. Globally, sustainable funds held $1.65 trillion in assets at the end of 2020.

ESG corporate reporting can be used by stakeholders to assess the material sustainability-related risks and opportunities relevant to an organization. Investors may also use ESG data beyond assessing material risks to the organization in their evaluation of enterprise value, specifically by designing models based on assumptions that the identification, assessment, and management of sustainability-related risks and opportunities with respect to all organizational stakeholders leads to higher long-term risk-adjusted return.


### Investment strategies

RI seeks to control the placing of its investments via several methods:

* Positive selection; where the investor actively selects the companies in which to invest; this can be done either by following a defined set of ESG criteria or by the best-in-class method where a subset of high performing ESG compliant companies is chosen for inclusion in an investment portfolio.
* Activism; strategic voting by shareholders in support of a particular issue, or to bring about change in the governance of the company.
* Engagement; investment funds monitoring the ESG performance of all portfolio companies and leading constructive shareholder engagement dialogues with each company to ensure progress.
* Consulting role; the larger institutional investors and shareholders tend to be able to engage in what is known as 'quiet diplomacy', with regular meetings with top management in order to exchange information and act as early warning systems for risk and strategic or governance issues.
* Exclusion; the removal of certain sectors or companies from consideration for investment, based on ESG-specific criteria.
* Integration; the inclusion of ESG risks and opportunities into traditional financial analysis of equity value.

However, in doing so, additional risks are introduced.

* Concentration risk; for example, when compared to the FTSE All-World index, the FTSE4Good Index has an increased weighting towards technology companies
* Lack of effectiveness in removing some industries; companies specialising in alcohol, tobacco, gambling, defence, AI, cryptocurrencies, oil, gas and coal are all still represented in the main indices

### Relationship between ESG and Corporate Valuation

Several studies have questioned the assumption that increased investment in ESG criteria always contributes to corporate value. Some researchers suggest that excessive investment or over-monitoring of ESG initiatives can not only be ineffective but also counterproductive to a firm's valuation. In certain cases, overinvestment in ESG by firms or excessive oversight by investors may limit expected benefits.

In this context, research suggests that the relationship between ESG performance and corporate valuation may be non-linear, exhibiting polynomial characteristics such as inverted U-shaped patterns. This implies the existence of an optimal level of ESG investment where benefits to corporate valuation are maximised, beyond which diminishing returns or even adverse effects may arise.


### Institutional investors

One of the defining marks of the modern investment market is the divergence in the relationship between the firm and its equity investors. Institutional investors have become the key owners of stock—rising from 35% in 1981 to 58% in 2002 in the US and from 42% in 1963 to 84.7% in 2004 in the UK and institutions tend to work on a long-term investment strategy. Insurance companies, Mutual Funds and Pension Funds with long-term payout obligations are much more interested in the long term sustainability of their investments than the individual investor looking for short-term gain. Where a Pension Fund is subject to ERISA, there are legal limitations on the extent to which investment decisions can be based on factors other than maximizing plan participants' economic returns.

Based on the belief that addressing ESG issues will protect and enhance portfolio returns, responsible investment is rapidly becoming a mainstream concern within the institutional industry. By late 2016, over a third of institutional investors (commonly referred to as LPs) based in Europe and Asia-Pacific said that ESG considerations played a major or primary role in refusing to commit to a private equity fund, while the same is true for a fifth of North American LPs. In reaction to investor interest in ESG, private equity and other industry trade associations have developed a number of ESG best practices, including a due diligence questionnaire for private fund managers and other asset managers to use before investing in a portfolio company.

There was a clear acceleration of the institutional shift towards ESG-informed investments in the second semester of 2019. The notion of "SDG Driven Investment" gained further ground amongst pension funds, SWFs and asset managers in the second semester of 2019, notably at the G7 Pensions Roundtable held in Biarritz, 26 August 2019, and the Business Roundtable held in Washington, DC, on 19 August 2019.

Networks of institutional investors committed to curbing climate change have emerged, where in institutional investors are agreeing to hold themselves accountable to climate action targets. One such example is the Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change, looking to deliver significant progress to net zero by 2030. Moreover, the networks have collaborated with investment frameworks to "evaluate" corporate progress to net zero, with one such framework being the Climate Action 100+, a series of criterion used to evaluate the companies emitting the largest quantity of GHG.


### Principles for Responsible Investment

The Principles for Responsible Investment Initiative (PRI) was established in 2005 by the United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative and the UN Global Compact as a framework for improving the analysis of ESG issues in the investment process and to aid companies in the exercise of responsible ownership practices. As of April 2019 there are over 2,350 PRI Signatories.


### Equator Principles

The Equator Principles is a risk management framework, adopted by financial institutions, for determining, assessing and managing environmental and social risk in project finance. It is primarily intended to provide a minimum standard for due diligence to support responsible risk decision-making. As of October 2019, 97 adopting financial institutions in 37 countries had officially adopted the Equator Principles, the majority of international Project Finance debt in emerging and developed markets. Equator Principles Financial Institutions (EPFIs) commit to not provide loans to projects where the borrower will not or is unable to comply with their respective social and environmental policies and procedures.

The Equator Principles, formally launched in Washington DC on 4 June 2003, were based on existing environmental and social policy frameworks established by the International Finance Corporation. These standards have subsequently been periodically updated into what is commonly known as the International Finance Corporation Performance Standards on social and environmental sustainability and on the World Bank Group Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines.


### Effects on the firm's performance

A company's financial performance represents its overall financial health-in other words, it's used to verify the company's viability and growth potential. A 2024 study by Susen and Etter demonstrates that higher levels of ESG performance (referred to as ESG Tilt) and changes in ESG performance over time (ESG Momentum) are positively correlated with increased employee satisfaction in S&P 500 companies, mediated by perceptions of organisational justice and expectations of future rewards. Such intangible factors are presumed to be the missing links between observed ESG performance and the financial outcomes of a company.

Other studies have shown that integrating ESG criteria into products has an effect on company performance. According to a 2015 study by Fried, Bush & Bassen, there is a positive link, which has been proven in 90% of cases, between ESG performance and financial performance. This positive link can be explained by a reduction in risk exposure. Integrating ESG criteria mitigates potential ESG-related risks. For example, complying with environmental standards avoids certain sanctions that would affect the financial side. Another study points in the same direction, claiming that publishing sustainability reports improves financial performance, and reputation, and it leads to the creation of a significant competitive advantage for the company. In addition, this disclosure is positively associated with return on equity].

Companies that adopt ESG criteria are more inclined to generate higher profits, as investors are more oriented towards more ecologically friendly and sustainable products. These investors are now taking more account of these guidelines in their investment decisions. In other words, the aim of integrating an ESG policy is to have a positive effect on financial performance to cover the costs it generates.

Despite the positive correlation between the inclusions of ESG criteria and financial performance, it does not imply that companies' primary aim is to become socially and environmentally responsible. According to Friedman (1962), "a company's main objective is to increase the wealth of its stakeholders". Furthermore, the ESG hype is a good opportunity for many corporate investors to make money. There are still no universal criteria for assessing whether a fund is ESG or not. Investors rely on ratings to make their investments, but these ratings do not always reflect a complete picture of ESG performance, because they are based on incomplete data supplied by the company itself. Good ESG performances attract and retain investors. Finally, although many studies show a positive relationship between good ESG performance and financial performance, other studies prove that it is difficult to quantify the real financial effect of an improvement in a company's social performance.

Assigning a precise monetary value to ESG issues is proving complex, if not arduous. Quantitative models and established ESG ratings do not always adequately capture these values, making it difficult to integrate them into investment decisions based on short-term financial data.

Initially, studies focused on the effect of CSR on financial performance, using models such as the CAPM. Early research, such as that by Alexander and Buchholz in 1978, found no significant link between socially responsible actions and stock market returns. Subsequent studies, such as those by Cochran and Wood in 1984, Aupperle, Carroll and Hatfield in 1985, and Blackburn, Doran and Shrader in 1994, confirmed this lack of correlation between ESG and corporate financial performance, despite differing methodological approaches.

Even when studies have attempted to specifically measure performance about CSR, such as that by Aupperle, Carroll, and, Hatfield in 1985, using risk-adjusted profitability measures, they have reached similar conclusions: the absence of a significant relationship between CSR and corporate profitability.

